Hi, everyone.
In this next year, we're going to create our game loop.
All right, so before diving there, we have some very minimal and basic styling reset for all of our
elements and basic styling for just that background image that we have there.
And in the e-mail, we just have one element that is canvassed in the CSF.
There are some styling at present here and there are some comments.
We are going to set up the stars, the game loop, the random sine function.
Now we have selected our canvas and initialize the 2D context.
This is the size of our canvas.
Now the stars color is going to be white.
These stars number is going to be 1000, OK?
And so each time on the screen we are going to see 1000 different stars.
Now, I check this on my laptop.
I could go like to 2000.
And if I Seveso now there are 2000 stars.
I could go all the way to 3000 stars.
And the limit for my computer's performance was almost 4000.
So now you can see that there are 4000 and the animation is sometimes just smooth and sometimes just
Ligi.
And I think it's not even 4000, it's 35 hundred.
And I can see it's smooth and my computer is overworking.
But if I put him to 10000 stars, you can see it's really lagging, right?
So the limit for my computer was 30, 500 stars.
Years might be way faster or slower.
And I'm just going to set it to 1000 stars because now the more stars you're going to have, the slower
the animation is going to be.
OK, but 1000 works really, really fine.
So let's go ahead.
And I'm going I'm just going to set it to 1000.
The size is going to be zero point zero 05, and this size is going to be multiplied by the inner with
an inner height.
So it's going to be it's going to be zero point zero zero five parts of this inner with an inner height.
And the speed is going to be that of the inner with an inner height as well.
So based on the values of inner with an inner height, let's say 1500 and let's say 1500 and 700, these
values are going to be calculated.
So first things first, I'm going to talk about the game loop.
Now, what a what is it?
What is the game?
So before actually diving into the game loop itself for this project, I'm just going to create a function
and I'm going to say run stars.
Right.
And I'm just going to call it run stars.
And I'm not going to pass on anything yet.
We are going to pass on something and I'm going to cancel like something.
Running right now, there is a method available to us and that method is called the get animation frame
method, and this this method is available to us by JavaScript.
And what this method is going to do is it's going to run this function as many times as it as it can.
And how do you know how many times it can?
So I'm just going to go into my display settings.
If you're going to display settings for Windows, then I'm not sure how this works for Mac.
I know how it works for Windows.
I've never worked with Mac before.
So if you go to here and if you come here, advanced displays setting, you can see that my refresh
rate is 60 hertz.
It means that what actually it means is, is whenever whenever we create animations or games, the screen
is being refreshed 60 times a second.
Now, the higher the refresh rate, the smoother the picture.
If the screen rate is like five, it means that it is going to refresh like five times a second rate
of the screen rate is one.
It is.
It means that it is going to refresh one time per second.
And the lower this number, the like the Ligeia and the more like interrupted screen experience you
are going to get now some games like for example, run on some computers, some games that do not run
because that the performance of this refresh rate.
Right.
Because the computer is not able to handle the refresh rate for that game.
So for me, it's 60 hertz.
It's usually 60 hertz.
What does that mean?
It means that this repeat animation frame is going to draw a screen for us 60 times per second.
That's how animation actually works.
Right.
So that's how actually motion picture or movies, how actually they work the way that movies, animations,
games they work is the screen is being drawn in front of our eyes 60 times per one second or it's cause
if or frames per second, which we are going to get into, I think, in our next project.
All right, so if I request the animation frame, which according to my computer is 60, it should call
this function 60 times a second.
Right.
And the way you can call it, you just repeat a sorry request animation frame and you pass in that function.
Run start ups run.
I always say run, start.
Come on, man.
Run starts.
And now we have created this and we have called the function here, but the function is not being executed.
So if I come down here and if I execute the function, run.
Run stars, and if I save it and if I come here, OK, so let's open it with Life Server.
Hmmm, there we go.
So if I come to inspect and if I come here and say the console, let's clear everything out and then
we can see that this is being this is running.
So it is it tries to run 60 times per second.
Right.
So if you like, for example, for one minute, it's going to run 300 and 3600 times per one minute.
Now you can see it's already at 1000.
And if you if you can the clock, it's running for like 30, 600 tonnes per second.
And what it actually says is that this screen that you can see in front of you, even though it's not
an animation, but this moving of this mouth mouse cursor, this is smooth, right?
This is this is smooth because this refresh rate of my screen is 60 hertz.
It tries to redraw the screen 60 times per second.
And in each redrawing of the screen, the screen might change its position.
So the screen might be like this.
OK, so let's bring it here.
It might go here.
So it might be movie.
You can see it's lagging.
The reason for that is I'm recording the screen.
That's why on your screen it's not going to lag.
And the reason that slag is because the refresh rate is slower, right?
Then the movement of the screen, so this is actually how animations and how games they are, they work.
I'm going to go over this concept one more time.
The concept is the screen, the game, whatever that's in front of you has to be redrawn 60 times per
second.
Why?
Because it has to accommodate for change.
And what does that change?
The change is simply the cursor moving from here all the way to here.
Right, and that's exactly the ideology behind creating games, the ideology behind motion picture,
which is movies or animations, which is again, movies.
Right.
So this is actually what happens.
It's like one picture being moved or being redrawn.
If you just research into into this, you will be able to understand how motion picture works.
Right, so this is a method which is available to us by JavaScript, and this is called the game loop,
right by the like cool kids in JavaScript, cool gamer's of JavaScript.
This is called the game loop.
Right.
So what we are going to now keep in mind, there is another method as well that does exactly the same
thing.
So if I come in this one out, you can see that it just draws it just says running once.
There is another method that does exactly the same thing.
And that method is, you guessed, right, set interval.
If you set the interval and you said the interval to one second or 1000 millisecond, 1000 millisecond,
one second end run, the function starts now.
This is one second, right?
We want it to run 60 times a second.
Why 60?
Because my screen refresh rate.
Refresh rate is 60 times.
And if I save it and if I come here, we get the exact same result.
So now as a game developer to be you decide which method you want to use.
If you use that interval, it's going to be it's going to do the same thing.
If you use repeat animation frame, which is fancier, asking to do the same thing.
So now it's completely up to you.
Whichever one you use doesn't matter.
Do not let anyone tell you which one is better, which one is not.
Both of them are going to do the same thing.
So you can see that it it constantly, constantly doing that.
And it doesn't matter how many times you refresh is just going to start over.
Now keep in mind, do not confuse this with that like an infinite loop that I think we talked about
where your browser is going to crash.
No, it is not an infinite loop.
It is just a thing that the browser is going to do a certain number of times per second.
That's it.
You can you can see that your browser still is working.
Now, in case you're wondering about the documentation, this is window that request animation frame.
You can go ahead and read all about it.
And this in the main page.
Right.
So I'm just going to close this.
So here we are.
And for the purposes of this game, we are not going to use the set interval.
I think we are going to use it.
I'm not sure.
But but for this, we are not going we are not going to use it.
So now let's dive into the game loop for this game.
So what I'm going to do here is I'm going to pass any parameter time now because we know that this request
animation is actually working with frames.
Right.
So for the game loop, what I want to do here is I want to set up the animation loop.
So inside here, I'm going to comment and I'm going to say the animation loop.
Now, the animation loop requires two time differences, right?
So I'm going to say let time.
Time difference, two different time intervals, if you will, and the other one is going to be time
lost and I'm going to set both of them to zero by default.
And after that, I'm going to run I'm going to request the animation from here as well.
Now, this request animation frame is responsible for the first frame and this request animation frame
is responsible for the second frame.
Right.
So whenever and in here, what I'm going to do is I'm going to specify the frames as well.
So I'm going to say so the time what is the time difference?
You might say the time difference is the difference between the now and the time last.
So the time now is the time that requires for this that is required for this specific frame.
The time last is the time of the last frame and after.
Now, now this is going to be responsible for this frame.
What about the what about when this frame is done and we go to the next frame?
So this is going to be responsible for the next frame as well.
But at that part, what happens to the time last?
What happens to the previous frame that we had?
Right.
And for that, what we are going to do is we are going to say time last equal to time now.
All right, so that's it this way we are going to calculate the frame difference, so calculate the
frame difference.
Now the frame difference happens between the this frame that is happening.
So if I come here, reload the page now, this frame that is happening and the previous frame that was
happening.
Right, this frame that is happening is responsible for this frame and next frame.
The last frame is responsible for the previous frame.
That was that that happened or that was happening.
Right.
So we have successfully set up our game loop.
It is not going to do anything.
Of course, we haven't done anything in here.
It and it is not going to do anything.
I'm just going to keep this one open and maybe, like, zoom out a bit in case we have any errors or
in case I want to log to the console or something.
So what we are going to do as starting our next lecture, we are going to start setting up our stars
and also we are going to create their signs in which direction they fly, what is their velocity, what
is even velocity?
What is the Pythagoras's theorem that we are going to use in this project as well?
Now, whenever you're dealing with game development, you need you need to deal with a lot of mathematics.
That's why I gave you that website in our previous chapter.
And we are going to go to that website often.
Right?
So that's it for this lecture.
See you in the next one.